JUDY WOODRUFF: Good evening. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Gwen Ifill is
away. On the "NewsHour" tonight:
angry protests after the release
of a video showing a black teen
shot by a Chicago police officer
renews the question of excessive
force. Then, a century ago,
Albert Einstein changed how we
think about our world. We talk
with biographer Walter Isaacson
about the scientist's
revolutionary ideas. WALTER
ISAACSON, Author, "Einstein: His
Life and Universe": And it was
just a huge leap. It wasn't like
a little improvement over
Newton's universe. It was just a
whole new way of looking at the
universe. JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
Queen of Soul, Aretha Franklin,
wins one of the first Portrait
of America Awards, and talks
about her remarkable career. All
that and more on tonight's "PBS
NewsHour." (BREAK) JUDY
WOODRUFF: Less than two weeks
after the attacks in Paris and
with a worldwide travel alert in
place, President Obama told
Americans today there's no
credible threat to the U.S. this
holiday weekend. He urged people
to go about their normal
activities this Thanksgiving. At
the White House, flanked by his
top counterterrorism and
national security advisers, he
said the U.S. government is
working overtime to protect the
homeland. BARACK OBAMA,
President of the United States:
The combined resources of our
military, our intelligence, and
our homeland security agencies
are on the case. They're
vigilant, relentless and
effective. In the event of a
specific, credible threat, the
public will be informed. JUDY
WOODRUFF: The president also
signed a $607 billion defense
authorization bill today,
despite provisions that ban him
from moving detainees at
Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, to the
U.S. In addition, the bill
contains a provision that the
president come up with a plan
for defeating the Islamic State.
Across the Atlantic, the French
announced that they will deploy
extra police and troops in Paris
next week, as about 140 world
leaders, including President
Obama, arrive for climate talks.
Meanwhile, in Belgium's capital
city, where some of the Paris
attackers were based, the
maximum threat alert remained in
place as a manhunt continued. In
spite of that, schools did
reopen in Brussels after a
two-day closure, and subway
service was also restored in
some areas under tight security.
The Islamic State has claimed
responsibility for yesterday's
bus bombing in Tunisia that
killed 12 presidential guards.
In an online post, the group
identified the suicide bomber
and included a picture of him
with explosives strapped to his
chest. Today, investigators
sifted through the wreckage and
found roughly 22 pounds of
military explosives on the bus.
Russia today touted its rescue
operation of the surviving
fighter pilot shot down by
Turkish jets yesterday. The
pilot told reporters he didn't
violate Turkey's airspace and he
received no warning, claims that
Turkey rejects. The other pilot
was killed. The shoot-down
sparked outrage in Moscow, where
protesters pelted the Turkish
Embassy with eggs and chanted
"murderers." And Russian
President Vladimir Putin
questioned Turkey's motivation.
VLADIMIR PUTIN, Russian
President (through translator):
The problem is not the tragedy
we witnessed yesterday. The
problem is much deeper. We
observe -- and not only us, I
assure you -- the whole world is
seeing that the current Turkish
leadership over a significant
number of years has been
pursuing a deliberate domestic
policy of supporting the
Islamization of their country.
JUDY WOODRUFF: In Ankara,
Turkey's prime minister, Ahmet
Davutoglu, called the downing a
communication accident, while
still maintaining the Russian
jet did cross into Turkish
airspace. But he said Russian
airstrikes along the
Turkey-Syria border must stop.
AHMET DAVUTOGLU, Turkish Prime
Minister (through translator):
Nobody should pave the way to
massacres against Turkmens in
this region under the pretext of
carrying out operations against
the Islamic State. Today, in
this region near Turkey's border
with Syria, civilians are
attacked with cluster bombs.
Attacks, close to a massacre,
are being carried out. This
should stop immediately. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Foreign ministers from
Russia and Turkey have also
agreed to meet, but not before
Russia ordered state-of-the-art
air defense missile systems
deployed at a Russian air base
in Syria. Pope Francis arrived
in Kenya today to begin his
first-ever trip to Africa.
Thousands of people lined the
streets of the capital, Nairobi,
to greet the pontiff as his
motorcade passed through. Later,
he urged Kenyans to work toward
peace in a world filled with
extremist violence. The pope
will be in Africa for six days,
with visits to Uganda and the
Central African Republic. Before
the year even ends, the U.N.
weather agency is predicting it
will be the hottest on record.
The World Meteorological
Organization said there was no
point waiting until the end of
the year because temperatures
around the world have already
been so hot. Scientists point to
manmade global warming and a
strong El Nino weather system
for a 1.8-degree Fahrenheit rise
over pre-industrial times. It
was a day of light trading and
little change on Wall Street
today The Dow Jones industrial
average gained one point to
close at 17813. The Nasdaq rose
13 points, and the S&P 500
dropped less than a point. And
President Obama carried out a
time-honored Thanksgiving
tradition at the White House
this afternoon. He officially
pardoned the National
Thanksgiving Turkey, named Abe,
during a Rose Garden ceremony.
The Turkey and an alternate bird
named Honest will live out the
rest of their lives on a farm in
Leesburg, Virginia. Still to
come on the "NewsHour": analysis
of the video released in
Chicago, what is on the tape and
what does it say about the
record of the Chicago police;
new details about the U.S.
bombing of a Doctors Without
Borders hospital in Afghanistan;
and much more. In Chicago, the
release of a video of a police
officer shooting a black
teenager has stirred racial
tensions and launched protests.
A warning to our viewers: Some
of what you are about to see may
be disturbing. Last night, the
city of Chicago released the
video from a police cruiser
dashboard camera. Seconds after
exiting his vehicle, police
officer Jason Van Dyke opens
fire on Laquan McDonald. The
teenager collapses. Van Dyke
continues shooting, emptying his
weapon. In all, McDonald was
shot 16 times. Officers had
responded to an allegation that
McDonald punctured a police car
tire with a knife. Yesterday,
Van Dyke was charged with
first-degree murder. Hundreds of
Chicago residents, upset by the
video, took to the streets
Tuesday night. Although the
protests remained peaceful for
the most part, demonstrators and
police officers clashed in a few
incidents, leading to the
arrests of five people.
Activists had repeatedly called
on the city to make public the
video of the incident, which
occurred more than a year ago.
The city had already paid
McDonald's family $5 million at
settlement. Still, it took a
freedom of information lawsuit
and a court order to force
authorities to release the
video. Today, members of the
city council's Black Caucus
criticized authorities for that
delay. RODERICK SAWYER, Chicago
Alderman: While we know the
system has failed, no one can
specifically say how. We must
value all the children of the
city of Chicago, more than just
thinking that a quick payout can
solve the problem. A clear,
transparent process is the only
way we can begin to build trust
in our communities with law
enforcement. JUDY WOODRUFF: At a
news conference last night,
Mayor Rahm Emanuel struck a
similar tone, and said that the
shooting of Laquan McDonald must
be an opportunity for the
community to heal and come
together. RAHM EMANUEL (D),
Mayor of Chicago: We need, as a
city, to get to a point where
young men in our community and
in parts of our city see an
officer and don't just see an
officer with a uniform and a
badge, but they see him as a
partner in helping them reach
their full potential. We also
have to get to a place in the
city where officers who patrol
communities in our city see a
young man not as a potential
problem and a risk, but they
also see in -- that young man as
an individual who is worthy of
their protection and their
potential. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Details on McDonald and Van Dyke
are still coming to light, but
here is what we know now. Laquan
McDonald was a 17-year-old
African-American. He was removed
from his mother's care twice at
a young age, and spent most of
his life as a ward of the state.
Family services twice
investigated allegations that
McDonald was sexually abused in
foster care, but no charges were
ever brought. At the time of his
death, the autopsy found
McDonald had the drug PCP in his
system. Jason Van Dyke is a
37-year-old white police
officer. He is married with two
teenage children. He served on
the Chicago police force for 14
years. During that time, he
received 18 citizen complaints,
eight of which were claims of
excessive force. Van Dyke's
lawyer told CNN today that the
dashboard camera video is
unreliable, and that his client
was justified in shooting the
teen. DANIEL HERBERT, Attorney
for Jason Van Dyke: No matter
how clear it is, there are
problems with video. And most
important, I think, is the fact
that video by its nature is
two-dimensional. And it distorts
images. So, what appears to be
clear on a video sometimes is
not always that clear. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Officer Van Dyke is
being held without bail. His
next court appearance is on
Monday. And now, for a law
enforcement perspective on this
video and the events it
captures, we turn to David
Klinger. He's professor of
criminal justice at the
University of Missouri-Saint
Louis, and a former police
officer. He is also author of
"Into the Kill Zone: A Cop's Eye
View of Deadly Force," a book
based on firsthand interviews
with police officers who have
shot people while on duty. David
Klinger, welcome to the program.
After looking at this video,
what does it tell you about what
happened on that night in
October a year ago? DAVID
KLINGER, Professor, University
of Missouri-Saint Louis: What I
see is, I see a tactical failure
on the part of the officer that
ended up shooting, as well as
his partner. And what I mean by
that is, police officers, when
they're dealing with individuals
who are reportedly armed with an
edged weapon, a knife, a
hatchet, a machete, what they're
trained to do is, they are
trained to try to keep distance.
And so if you look at the video,
what we see from the back of Mr.
McDonald as he's walking toward
these police officers is, he
moves away and the officers
actually move towards him away
from their vehicle. And so
that's the very first thing that
I saw. And I'm thinking, this
really doesn't make any sense. I
was thinking at first perhaps
there was maybe some innocent
people on the opposite side of
the street. I checked the video
a couple, three times. There is
no evidence that there were any
other citizens who might be in
jeopardy, and so it didn't make
any sense. And then, when the
gunshots start to ring out, I
couldn't understand why shots
were being fired. Then McDonald
falls down, and I don't
understand why additional shots
are fired. And so, as I look at
this, I am scratching my head,
figuratively, because it doesn't
add up. It doesn't appear to me
to be what we call a reasonable
use of deadly force. JUDY
WOODRUFF: So, the lawyer for the
officer is saying -- we just
heard him say that, from a
different perspective, this
officer saw something that we
are not able to see in this
video. What could that possibly
be? DAVID KLINGER: I don't know.
And, at one point, I do agree
with the lawyer that a video is
never dispositive, because it
doesn't tell everything. What
the courts have ruled for a long
time, for over 30 years now --
or excuse me -- for 30 years
now, is you have to take the
totality of the circumstances
into account when you're looking
at what police officers do. And
then in 1989 in Graham v.
Connor, the U.S. Supreme Court
said that you can't look at it
with 20/20 hindsight, but rather
through the eyes of a reasonable
police officer on or at the
scene. And so, consequently, we
do have to take into account
everything in addition to the
video that might be relevant.
What that might be that would
overturn what appears to be a
clear-cut case of unreasonable
force, I don't know what it is.
But, certainly, the
investigation is never over
merely because a video comes
forth. We have to hear the
officer's statement, partner's
statement, listen to the
dispatch tapes. Maybe there's
other video, maybe there's other
audio we're unaware of. The
bottom line is that the officer
has been charged with homicide,
with first-degree murder, and he
deserves his day in court, and
he deserves to have the
opportunity to put forth a
defense. And we will have to see
what the defense is. JUDY
WOODRUFF: You started out
describing what an officer might
do approaching someone, you
said, with an edged weapon. What
is the standard of practice for
an officer in a situation like
this? I know you can't
generalize across every part of
the country, but in general,
what would be the practice an
officer is advised to take?
DAVID KLINGER: In a situation
where you're dealing with an
individual with a knife, a
hatchet, some other form of
edged weapon, you want to try to
keep distance. And the reason
you want to try to keep distance
is if you are 30 or 40 or 50
feet away, it's awfully hard for
that individual armed with that
weapon to harm you with it. But
when a suspect is within about
20 to 25 feet -- it depends on
what training block of
instruction you might get in a
given police department around
the country -- that's what we
call the zone where an officer
could reasonably perceive that
his or her life is in jeopardy
if someone is moving towards
them. JUDY WOODRUFF: Right.
DAVID KLINGER: And the reason
for that is basically threefold.
Number one, it takes time to
perceive something and react to
it. Were you trying to cut me
off, ma'am? JUDY WOODRUFF: No, I
was -- because I just wanted to
get to one -- one question.
DAVID KLINGER: OK. JUDY
WOODRUFF: And that is, when
someone is down on the ground,
what justifies continuing to
fire round after round at that
person? DAVID KLINGER: In this
situation, I can't see anything
that would justify it. However,
if an individual was armed with
a firearm, it really doesn't
matter if they're standing up,
sitting down or laying down. If
they are moving that firearm in
a fashion that could threaten
someone, i.e., they could be
continuing to pull the trigger,
then that would be justifiable.
But, in this situation, as far
as I know -- and I haven't heard
any claim that there was any
indication at all that the
suspect was armed with a firearm
-- it wouldn't make any sense to
continue to fire. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Professor David Klinger,
University of Missouri-Saint
Louis, we thank you. DAVID
KLINGER: Thank you for having
me. JUDY WOODRUFF: And, next, we
hear from two reporters who have
been closely following these
events. They both have years of
experience covering Chicago
crime, policing, and race
relations. Mark Konkol is a
columnist at DNA Info. It's a
neighborhood reporting site. In
2011, he and a team at The
Chicago Sun-Times won a Pulitzer
Prize for their reporting on
violence, crime and policing in
Chicago. And Jamie Kalven is a
freelance journalist. He
uncovered the autopsy report
showing that Laquan McDonald was
shot 16 times by officer Jason
Van Dyke. Kalven is also the
founder of the Invisible
Institute. It's a nonprofit
journalism project that recently
released tens of thousands of
pages of civilian complaints
filed against the Chicago Police
Department. And, gentlemen, we
thank you both for being with
us. Mark Konkol, let me start
with you. How does this incident
fit into the bigger picture of
Chicago police relations with
the African-American community
in that city? MARK KONKOL,
DNAinfo: Well, I think that it's
just a big example of what's
been happening for a long time.
There is a severe lack of trust
between people who live in
poverty-stricken communities
that are crippled by violence
and fractured gang wars. And
Chicago -- the Chicago Police
Department, there's a lot of
good cops on the department. I
would say the overwhelming
majority, 90 percent, 95 percent
-- and there's been stories
written that, you know, there is
a few officers that are
troubled. But, overall, the
police department has a
generational problem that a
federal judge said was a culture
that's of the public interest,
and that is the thin blue line
code of silence within the
department. And it's something
that's really wrong with the
department. And Cook County
President Toni Preckwinkle
recently said that the culture
of law enforcement isn't
trusted, and it's just -- this
incident highlights that to the
nth degree. And the protests
really aren't just about one
incident. It's about being fed
up. JUDY WOODRUFF: Right. MARK
KONKOL: And I think that's the
message that these protesters
have been sending and that
public officials have been
sending as well. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Let me turn to you, Jamie
Kalven. As we said, you were
part of the effort to uncover
the documents that showed just
what happened on that night and
a broader practice among Chicago
police. It's been 13 months
since Laquan McDonald was killed
-- died. What could explain the
delay in releasing this video
and in charging this officer, as
he was yesterday? JAMIE KALVEN,
Invisible Institute: I think
that's the essential question at
this point. Everything that we
now know the day after the video
was released was known by the
city, by the department within
hours of Laquan McDonald's
death. There were multiple
witnesses, police witnesses,
civilian witnesses. There was
the video, and the autopsy you
referred to before was actually
conducted at 8:30 the next
morning with an investigator
from the Independent Police
Review Authority, the city
agency tasked with investigating
police shootings in the room.
So, you know, with all of that
information, the information
that has been the basis now for
the indictment of officer Van
Dyke, the city put out, the
police department put out a
press release saying that the
young man had approached and
lunged toward the police
officers and was shot as an act
of self-defense on the part of
officer Van Dyke. They have to
have known that that was a
fabrication. Now, 13 months
later, we're getting a quite
different narrative. So, I mean,
this -- if this had been a gang
shooting in Chicago, with this
amount of evidence, witnesses,
video, the information from the
autopsy, I imagine it would have
been weeks, you know, a matter
of a few weeks before an
indictment was returned. So I
think -- I don't know the answer
to that question, but I think it
is the question of the moment.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Mark Konkol, what
-- what do you know about your
reporting on the Chicago police
that could explain this, the
delay? MARK KONKOL: Well, one of
the -- there is a provision in
the Chicago Police Department's
union contract that says when
there is a complaint of
misconduct against an officer,
the city, the citizen review
board is not allowed to release
the name or any -- identify the
officer in any way unless the
complaint is sustained. When we
bring up the fact that officer
Van Dyke had 18 misconduct
complaints, all of them which
were not sustained, some people
think that's a red flag, and
that that's something that the
public should know when it
actually happens. When there is
a police shooting, reporters
across the city file Freedom of
Information Act requests to get
the video of the shooting, and
they're always doing that for
the same reason, that the case
is under investigation. It's a
very broad statement that police
use. (CROSSTALK) JUDY WOODRUFF:
And we heard the prosecutor...
(CROSSTALK) MARK KONKOL: ...
public records. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Excuse me. I was just going to
say, we heard the prosecutor say
yesterday it's more complex when
it's a police officer involved.
MARK KONKOL: Well, yes, it is
more complex. And it usually is.
But there's -- what happened
here is that the city paid a $5
million settlement without a
lawsuit being filed. The
information didn't come up. And
it wasn't until citizens,
journalists fought to get the
video released in court that we
know what we know now. And I
think all those things
contribute to a lack of trust in
the community. And these are the
things that you hear Chicago
aldermen saying need to be
remedied. There needs to be more
sunlight on this process. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Let me... MARK KONKOL:
If you want people that have
been suffering from gun violence
in these neighborhoods to be
held accountable for cooperating
with police, the message that's
being sent is, we want the
police to be under the same
amount of scrutiny. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Jamie Kalven, let me
just repeat what we heard Mayor
Emanuel say just a minute ago,
that: We want to get to a point
in our community where young men
see an officer and don't just
see someone in a uniform and a
badge, but someone who is a
partner helping them reach their
potential. Is Chicago making
progress in that regard? We hear
statistics that the number of
officer-involved shootings is
down in the African-American
community. JAMIE KALVEN: Well,
that's only one measure. I spent
a lot of time -- I have spent a
lot of time in recent years
doing intensive interviews with
young African-American teenagers
on the South Side of Chicago in
neighborhoods most affected by
these patterns. They
consistently say two things,
first, that: If we have an
encounter with police officers,
we know they have all the power.
And, secondly, if something
happens in a random stop or some
other kind of interaction with a
police officer, something
happens, we know we won't be
believed. Until those
fundamental conditions change,
then I think there are all sorts
of other -- otherwise sensible
measurers, in terms of building
relationships and police
officers interacting with
residents in contexts apart from
law enforcement -- all these
things make -- make perfect
sense -- in the absence of
accountability, in the absence
of confidence on the part of
citizens that, if police
officers exceed their roles,
violate the public trust, they
will be effectively disciplined,
then I think it just impeaches
and undermines everything else.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Well, gentlemen,
we are going to have to leave it
there. Clearly, Chicago is a
city in the spotlight right now,
and I know we're going to
continue to follow this. We
thank you both, Mark Konkol and
Jamie Kalven. Thank you. JAMIE
KALVEN: Thank you. MARK KONKOL:
Thanks. JUDY WOODRUFF: And the
problem of police shootings
isn't isolated to the city of
Chicago. A funeral was held in
Minneapolis today for Jamar
Clark. He's a black man who was
fatally shot by police last
week. His funeral procession
passed Black Lives Matter
protesters who have been
demonstrating for days. Police
also announced they have a
fourth person in custody in the
shootings of some of the
protesters on Monday. Nearly two
months after a bombing at a
hospital in Afghanistan, the
U.S. military has completed its
investigation into the incident.
The announcement and details
about why the hospital was
mistakenly targeted came out
today in Kabul. Hari Sreenivasan
has our story. GEN. JOHN
CAMPBELL, Commander of U.S.
Forces in Afghanistan: This was
a tragic mistake. U.S. forces
would never intentionally strike
a hospital or other protected
facilities. HARI SREENIVASAN:
General John Campbell, the U.S.
commander in Afghanistan, said
the destruction of the hospital
in the northern city of Kunduz
was an avoidable accident.
That's the judgment contained in
a more-than-3,000-page report
compiled since the early October
attack. At least 31 civilians
died and another 28 were injured
when a U.S. warplane struck the
facility operated by Doctors
Without Borders, more commonly
know by its French acronym, MSF.
Despite repeated calls from its
staff to American officials both
inside and outside Afghanistan,
the hospital was hammered by the
American AC-130 gunship. The
attack followed days of heavy
fighting in Kunduz as Afghan and
American forces fought to retake
the city from the Taliban.
Today, Campbell said the plane's
crew had been given faulty
location information of a
suspected Taliban base. GEN.
JOHN CAMPBELL: That U.S. strike
upon the MSF trauma center in
Kunduz city, Afghanistan, was
the direct result of human error
compounded by systems and
procedural failures. The medical
facility was misidentified as a
target by U.S. personnel who
believed they were striking a
different building several
hundred meters away, where there
were reports of combatants. HARI
SREENIVASAN: MSF has maintained
no armed fighters were in the
area near the hospital when the
strike occurred. The group
released its own report earlier
this month. Today, it repeated
its call for an independent
investigation, and said the
attack cannot only be dismissed
as individual human error.
Joining me now for more on this
is Gordon Lubold of The Wall
Street Journal. He's just been
briefed on the report by
Pentagon officials. So, the big
question I think everyone is
wondering is, how could they get
this so wrong, when Doctors
Without Borders goes out of
their way to make sure that
everyone in the theater knows
exactly where the hospital is?
GORDON LUBOLD, The Wall Street
Journal: Right. So, what we
learned from this report that
was released today at the
Pentagon and General Campbell,
who is the commander of all
allied and U.S. forces in
Afghanistan, is that this really
was human error. It was just a
combination of errors, really,
to include some technical
problems that they had on the
gunship that was used during the
October 3 strike that
contributed to just the wrong
targeting of the -- targeting of
the wrong building in Kunduz
that night And it ended up being
the hospital, not the building
several hundred meters away that
they meant to target. HARI
SREENIVASAN: So, Afghan forces
send in the coordinates to this
gunship, but, according to the
summary by the general, the
gunship is, what, just out of
range enough where their GPS is
just a little off? GORDON
LUBOLD: Right. Afghan forces
conveyed coordinates to the
right target, which happened to
be an intelligence building
where the Taliban was known to
be positioned. Through U.S.
special forces who were also on
the ground there, they conveyed
these coordinates to the crew of
the gunship. But because the --
some of the capabilities on the
ship and on the plane itself
were malfunctioning, a lot of
this was communicated verbally,
and the coordinates somehow got
plugged in and, I think, maybe
properly, but it malfunctioned
and sent the crew to an empty
field to be the target. The crew
realized, this is the wrong
place and relied then on a
verbal description of the
target, and then began striking
for about a half-an-hour the
hospital, and not the actual
target, which was, as I say,
several hundred meters away. And
I think what we learned was that
word never got to them in time
to stop targeting that hospital,
and they just simply didn't
realize that that was the place
they weren't supposed to hit.
HARI SREENIVASAN: During the
airstrikes, people from the
hospital were calling anyone
they could, and they were
actually getting that
information to headquarters,
saying, listen, you're bombing
us, you have the wrong target.
But wasn't there a list that
they could compare to say, OK, I
guess, guys, you guys are
bombing an area that's on our
no-bomb list? GORDON LUBOLD:
Right. And from the outside,
even to me -- and I cover this a
lot -- it doesn't quite make
sense, like, why it would take
that long for the kind of
process to catch up with itself,
when somebody's calling, as you
say, and saying, like, you're
bombing us, this is the wrong
place. But I think that because
of the communications errors,
because of the -- as somebody
who's very familiar with it
described to me this morning,
said, the crew of the gunship
had kind of convinced themselves
that this was the target. I
don't -- again, I don't think
that they were getting
information that it wasn't the
target yet, as I understand it.
But because of the problems and
the because of the verbal
description that was given to
them, they essentially were
convinced that was the -- they
were doing the right thing, they
were targeting the right place.
And, obviously, they weren't.
HARI SREENIVASAN: So, what are
the consequences now that the
government has this report?
GORDON LUBOLD: The consequences
are that we don't know yet what
will happen to these military
personnel who have been
suspended from their jobs.
General Campbell will conduct an
assessment, and then we will
know who -- what happens to
these people. But, for now,
we're in that zone of he's still
conducting an investigation into
what's going to happen to them.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Gordon Lubold
of The Wall Street Journal,
thanks so much for joining us.
GORDON LUBOLD: Thank you. JUDY
WOODRUFF: Stay with us. Coming
up on the "NewsHour": how to eat
better and shop differently
while living on very little; and
the Queen of Soul on her past,
present and future. But, first,
this week marks the 100th
anniversary of the publication
of Albert Einstein's greatest
work, a series of papers laying
out the general theory of
relativity. Gwen has a look at
how it changed our understanding
of the cosmos and the man behind
the ideas. She recorded this
conversation earlier this week.
GWEN IFILL: His work transformed
our way of living at the cosmos.
When Einstein put forward his
general theory of relativity,
that gravity itself is the
bending of space and time by
mass and energy, it was a
seminal moment in the history of
science. Today, the importance
of his work is even better
recognized than a century ago.
"NOVA" pays tribute tonight with
a special program called "Inside
Einstein's Mind." Here's a clip
about how it's seen today. MAN:
The best theories in physics
always take to places where the
people who invented them didn't
imagine. And a truly wonderful
theory like general relativity
predicts all sorts of things
that Einstein didn't conceive
of. The theory has a life of its
own. We understand general
relativity much better right now
than Albert Einstein ever did.
MAN: And liftoff of space
shuttle Discovery with the
Hubble space telescope, our
window on the universe.
NARRATOR: Today, 100 years after
general relativity is first
presented, new technology is
allowing us to explore the most
remarkable predictions of the
theory, an expanding universe,
black holes, ripples in
space-time, and perhaps the most
bizarre, the idea that not just
space, but time itself, is
distorted by heavy objects. GWEN
IFILL: Walter Isaacson, who's in
tonight's special, is the author
of a well-known biography on
Einstein. He's also the CEO of
the Aspen Institute. Welcome,
Walter. WALTER ISAACSON, Author,
"Einstein: His Life and
Universe": Good to be back,
Gwen. GWEN IFILL: You have said
that the theory, the general
theory of relativity -- I'm
going to say that right -- is
the most beautiful theory in the
history of science. What do you
mean by that? WALTER ISAACSON:
Gorgeous. It is a mathematical,
as well as conceptual
masterpiece. It's something that
can be visualized as bodies
telling space and time how to
curve and the curving of space
and time telling bodies how to
move, and then the math goes
with it. And it was just a
hugely -- it wasn't like a
little improvement over Newton's
universe. It was just a whole
new way of looking at the
universe. GWEN IFILL: Define
relativity for a layperson like
myself. WALTER ISAACSON:
Relativity begins in 1905, in
which Einstein says, oh, time is
relative depending on your state
of motion. Then 10 years ago,
exactly 100 years ago this week,
he comes up with the
generalization of the theory
that says acceleration, gravity,
time, space, they're all
related, and these equations
show how. GWEN IFILL: And the
thing that bends the whole
conversation is the speed of
light, right? We use the term
speed of light in a haphazard
way all the time, but he meant
it in a very literal way. WALTER
ISAACSON: It begins with
Einstein trying to figure out,
why is the speed of light always
constant, no matter which way
you're moving, if you're moving
toward the source of the light
or away from it? And in 1905,
when he was just a patent clerk
in the Swiss patent office, all
the physicists of Europe are
trying to figure this out. And
he begins his path to whole
theory of relativity by
realizing that if you're
traveling really fast, say, to
clock, it will look different
for you, whether it's
synchronized, as somebody
traveling really fast in the
other direction. And he comes up
with the amazing, sort of
imaginatively, that, oh, I get
it, the speed of light is always
constant, but time is relevant
depending on your state of
motion. So that's the first
building block of the whole
theory of relativity. It's
called the special theory of
relativity, because it was just
about constant velocity, motion
and the speed of light. GWEN
IFILL: And then gravity comes
into the equation. WALTER
ISAACSON: Right. It takes him 10
years to generalize this -- the
theory, because he's wondering,
what about the acceleration? And
his theory says, nothing can
travel faster than the speed of
light. But Newton's theory of
gravity said that gravity acts
instantaneously, the moon
pulling the sun, pulling the
Earth, vice versa. That's
instantaneous. And Einstein is
trying to figure out how that
could be, and so he realizes
that the effects you would feel
of acceleration, like if you're
in an car, an elevator car
accelerating upwards, that feels
just like gravity. And he comes
up with the equivalence theory,
that gravity and acceleration
are both really the same thing.
GWEN IFILL: Bowling ball and the
trampoline, explain -- I love
that idea, that analogy.
(CROSSTALK) WALTER ISAACSON:
That's another way he visualizes
it, because the cool thing about
Einstein is, he thinks visually
in imaginative thought
experiment. And one of them is
rolling a big ball on a piece of
fabric. You and I can call it a
trampoline. And what happens? It
curves the fabric. Now, if you
roll some billiard balls behind
it, what happens? They roll and
they start curving towards the
bowling ball. Why? Not because
the bowling ball has some
mysterious attraction at a
distance, but because the ball
has curved the fabric of the
trampoline. And what Einstein is
able to visualize is that a big
mass moving curves not just the
fabric of the trampoline, but
all four dimensions of space and
time. GWEN IFILL: You talk about
thought experiments. Was
Einstein basically a daydreamer?
WALTER ISAACSON: Yes. He gets to
call them gedankenexperiment,
which means thought experiments.
These are things where he
imagines what happens if a big
object is rolling across a
fabric. And it's just
imagination, what we might call
daydreaming. He never did
physical experiments in a lab.
He just did the experiments
visualizing concepts in his head
and said, well, what if I caught
up with a light beam? Or what if
I were in the car -- an elevator
car accelerating upward in outer
space where there is no gravity?
Or what would happen if a
massive object rolled over a
fabric? These were the
imaginative thought experiments
that leads him to this most
beautiful of all theories. GWEN
IFILL: If this was never proven
in a lab, or at least if that is
not where his ideas came from,
has anyone ever tried in the 100
years since to debunk the
theory? WALTER ISAACSON: Oh,
over and over again. The first
major proof is in 1919, because
he says, well, gravity will bend
a light beam a certain way. And
you say, well, we could look at
the light from a star that goes
right next to the sun to see if
it's bent. But you can't do that
unless you have a total eclipse.
Otherwise, you go blind. So,
they wait for the 1919 eclipse,
and it proves Einstein right.
Over and over again, you read
stories saying, Einstein's
theories disproved or debunked,
and then you wait a month or
two, and there has been nothing
that has cut out the
underpinnings of general
relativity, of all of
relativity. And even the ones
that Einstein thought, well,
this just can't be true, like
his theory predicts black holes
-- it predicts an expanding
cosmos. He said, well, that
can't be right, so maybe
somebody will have to fix the
theory. It turns out the theory
is right, and the universe is
expanding. There are black
holes. GWEN IFILL: Einstein, we
salute you. WALTER ISAACSON: A
hundred years ago. Happy
birthday. GWEN IFILL: A hundred
years ago. (LAUGHTER) GWEN
IFILL: Walter Isaacson, thank
you very much. WALTER ISAACSON:
Thank you, Gwen. JUDY WOODRUFF:
People are dusting off roasting
pans and stove tops to make
family favorites this week, but
for tens of millions of
Americans, getting dinner on the
table many nights can be a
financial challenge.
Correspondent William Brangham
went to New York to visit the
author of a new cookbook aimed
at helping families eat well
while stretching their food
dollars. He was there just in
time to try a few recipes for
Thanksgiving. WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Walking through a grocery store
with Leanne Brown, you're going
to get a whirlwind of advice.
LEANNE BROWN, Author, "Good and
Cheap: Eat Well on $4/Day": You
want to get these little
snack-size guys. But they are
often about double the price of
what you would pay if you're
just buying the larger quantity.
Always get a can of tomatoes,
rather than a jar. Always in
almost all of these is large
tomatoes. WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
Brown's mission is to help
shoppers on a tight budget
stretch their money and to
create new options in the
kitchen. It's at the core of her
new cookbook, "Good and Cheap:
Eat Well on $4/Day." The book
began as her master's thesis
when she was at New York
University's Food Studies
Program. Brown wanted to develop
recipes to answer a simple
question: Could someone on food
stamp benefits eat well on the
program's average budget of $4
per person per day? LEANNE
BROWN: Sure, there's a lot of
sort of black and white
pamphlets and there's a lot
like, here's how to eat cheaply.
But there wasn't as much stuff
on how to still eat well. And as
sort of, not a lifelong cooking,
but a most-of-my-life-long cook,
I know that the cost of basic
foods is so inexpensive, you
just need to know how to put
them together. That's where the
magic is. WILLIAM BRANGHAM: To
Brown's way of thinking, eating
well isn't a luxury, but a basic
right. LEANNE BROWN: Four
dollars a day is not something
that anyone should try to do.
It's a reality for 46 million
people. And in some ways, I
think it was a reaction to when
I was studying and thinking,
this is so unjust, this is so
difficult, this is so terrible.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Thesis
finished, Brown posted the
recipes and her own photos on
her Web site free for anyone to
download. When someone posted
that on a popular online message
board, it took off. LEANNE
BROWN: At first, I felt like
something horrible had happened,
because, at that point, nobody
had been to my Web site, except,
like, my father to tell me about
all of the mistakes I had on
there. You know, like, nobody
was visiting it. I was like,
what is going on? But it turned
out to be all these people who
were really excited about it who
were saying, this is going to be
helpful for me in my life right
now. WILLIAM BRANGHAM: That led
to a Kickstarter campaign. Brown
met her $10,000 goal in just 36
hours. She eventually raised 14
times that, and sent more than
30,000 low- or no-cost books to
various nonprofits to give away
to their clients. The book's now
been published, complete with 50
new recipes. For every copy
purchased, one is given away to
someone in need. The book's
popularity reaches beyond those
stuck with extremely tight
budgets. Maybe it's because
Brown's message is so different
from popular cooking shows and
foodie magazines, where good
cooking is really complex.
LEANNE BROWN: I like to think of
my role as kind of coaxing
people to just give it a try,
because it's so easy, actually.
You have to try it. And then I
think cooking sells itself.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: The
fast-approaching holidays don't
mean Brown's principles of
thoughtful, efficient shopping
and cooking have to go out the
window. So, it's Thanksgiving
season. LEANNE BROWN: Yes.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: People are
starting to think about planning
for that meal. What are some
basic guidelines you would
offer? LEANNE BROWN: Oh, man.
Well, so this is the time of the
year where everyone is, first,
cooking from scratch, which is
awesome. And you're eating a lot
of seasonal foods as well, which
is also awesome. That's like a
good and cheap principle. The
thing that I want everyone to
really keep in mind is that you
shouldn't feel like you have to
make all 20 of those sort of
side dishes, because that can
get really inefficient. WILLIAM
BRANGHAM: Brown picked a few
recipes from the book that could
work as Thanksgiving sides and
appetizers. LEANNE BROWN: We're
going to make Thanksgiving-style
deviled eggs. WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
I love deviled eggs. LEANNE
BROWN: I love deviled eggs too.
They're such a great little
party snack. And so, really, I
always say, like, obviously, the
classic is fantastic, but you
can make them taste like
anything that you happen to have
around. So we're just going to
basically cut all these guys. I
already boiled them. We're going
to take beautiful rosemary and a
little bit of one of my favorite
sides, pureed squash. And this
is just pureed squash with
garlic. This is sort of my
favorite. And so it's the one
that we're adding to here, but
it could be a lot of different
things. Like, this could be
sweet potatoes or this could be
maybe a mashed cauliflower or
something like that, whatever
you have around, if you think
that could go well with eggs.
Like, why not? WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
And so you don't mind -- if
you're serving this dish with
these eggs, you feel like these
are distinct enough that you're
not overlapping? LEANNE BROWN:
No, totally. I think this just
sort of brings the meal
together. WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Each
serving of these costs just
about 15 cents. In fact, all of
Brown's recipes show you roughly
what they will cost. Next up was
her cheesy cauliflower, a
substitute for mac and cheese.
It comes to about $1.65 per
serving. LEANNE BROWN:
Basically, all we did was, we
chopped up our beautiful
cauliflower and we just boiled
it for about three to four
minutes. WILLIAM BRANGHAM: OK.
LEANNE BROWN: So -- and now we
have that in the bowl. We're
going to make our sauce. So,
we're going to let the butter
melt, one bay leaf, and about
three cloves of chopped garlic.
And we're going to add our
flour, just all in there at
once. This is a cup-and-a-half
of milk. And then we will grab
our cheese. WILLIAM BRANGHAM:
So, the cheese sauce goes over
the cauliflower? LEANNE BROWN:
Yes. We're just going to bake it
at 400 for about 40, 45 minutes.
But I have one baking already,
so we can grab that right now.
Oh, yes. Oh, my gosh. WILLIAM
BRANGHAM: Gorgeous. Your book,
on the surface, seems like a
cookbook. It's masquerading as a
cookbook. LEANNE BROWN: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: But it
certainly seems like there is a
manifesto buried on every page
there. LEANNE BROWN: Right.
WILLIAM BRANGHAM: I mean, am I
reading into that, or is that
there? LEANNE BROWN: No, I think
it's definitely there. I think
of it as a strategy guide for
sort of eating well. You know,
how do we do this whole thing?
And cooking is a massive part of
it, but it's not all of it. And
I think the manifesto part is
that, yes, it's a strategy guide
and it's a thing we have to do,
but it's also something that we
all absolutely deserve,
regardless of how much money we
have. WILLIAM BRANGHAM: Today,
more than 71,000 copies of "Good
and Cheap" have gone to nearly
900 nonprofits around the
country, where they're
distributed to clients who
couldn't afford to buy it
otherwise. For the "PBS
NewsHour," I'm William Brangham
in New York City. JUDY WOODRUFF:
Not only economical, but yum. If
you're cooking for only a few
this Thanksgiving, you will find
a special recipe from Leanne
Brown for a one-pan Thanksgiving
dinner. That's on our Web site,
where you can also find the
recipes from this story. Aretha
Franklin been given many honors
over the years, but, last week,
she was honored in a new way, as
Gwen and I emceed the inaugural
American Portrait Gallery event
to honor the portraits of a
nation. Gwen is back with a
conversation with the Queen of
Soul about her remarkable career
and her big plans still coming
up. GWEN IFILL: It was an
evening to honor legends, from
designers to heroes from the
world of sport and the military.
But it was the Queen of Soul who
got the red carpet crowd to
their feet. Mid-concert,
Detroit's own Aretha Franklin
added another prestigious honor
to her extensive collection.
JUDY WOODRUFF: There is only one
Aretha Franklin. (CHEERING AND
APPLAUSE) GWEN IFILL: The
National Portrait Gallery's
first Portrait of America Award.
Franklin's likeness hangs at the
Washington museum. ARETHA
FRANKLIN, Musician: We were
ladies and gentlemen, and we
weren't overnight stars. It was
gradual. And, for me, I just try
to keep my head out of the
clouds, keep my feet on the
ground. GWEN IFILL: The
73-year-old Franklin has been
honored for her jazz, rock, pop,
classical, and gospel singing.
She is the first female and just
the fourth artist overall to
place 100 career titles on
Billboard's hot R&B/hip-hop
songs chart. Franklin is no
stranger to Washington,
performing at tree lightings,
inaugurations and White House
concerts. In 2005, she received
the nation's highest civilian
honor, the Presidential Medal of
Freedom. This latest honor
guarantees that her image will
live alongside her soundtrack.
National Portrait Gallery
director Kim Sajet says Franklin
was a natural choice. KIM SAJET,
Director, National Portrait
Gallery: The portrait of Aretha
is a gateway. I think straight
away, standing in front of it, I
get a sense of, obviously, she's
singing. She's got this big hair
moment. There's a lot of color.
But, also, her name is spelt in
capital letters at the bottom of
this print, "ARETHA." She
actually probably is one of the
very few handful of people in
this country we know exactly by
their first name who we are
talking about. She's a lesson
for all of us, being smart and
tenacious, had a dogged
determinedness about herself,
which I think many of us can
admire. GWEN IFILL: After her
performance at the Gallery, I
sat down with Franklin, who is
seen worldwide as the diva, the
queen, the consummate
entertainer. Tell me, how do you
think of yourself? ARETHA
FRANKLIN: A lady next door. GWEN
IFILL: But nobody thinks of you
that way, none of your fans,
none of the people in that room
tonight. ARETHA FRANKLIN: Sure.
Yes. Yes. GWEN IFILL: They think
of you as much more than that.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Well, no, they
don't see me in that setting,
right. GWEN IFILL: Yes. So,
then, how do you handle the
weight of the diva-ness of this
all? Because, I mean, there's a
little bit of that in you. You
have a lot of flair. ARETHA
FRANKLIN: I love to sing. It's
just a natural thing for me.
GWEN IFILL: And in the span of a
six-decade music career, there
was never anything else she
wanted to do. So, is part of
you, you know, always going to
be Reverend C.L. Franklin's
daughter? ARETHA FRANKLIN:
Absolutely. GWEN IFILL: I'm a
preacher's kid, too, so I...
ARETHA FRANKLIN: I knew you --
P.K., OK. GWEN IFILL: But I -- I
am a P.K. But I don't sing quite
like you. ARETHA FRANKLIN: Oh,
well, we don't all sing.
(LAUGHTER) GWEN IFILL: We have
other gifts. ARETHA FRANKLIN:
Yes, you have other gifts. GWEN
IFILL: I want to ask you about
that, because one of the things
that comes up with people who
are immensely successful about
what they choose is what brought
about the success, who urged
you, or who didn't stop you.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Well, my mentor
was Clara Ward of the famous
Ward gospel singers of
Philadelphia. And my dad was my
coach. He coached me. And just
my natural love for music is
what drove me. GWEN IFILL: Do
you keep watch of the young
people who are huge out there,
and think, that person was the
young me? ARETHA FRANKLIN: When
I see choirs, the junior choir.
GWEN IFILL: In each and every
one of those cases, and tonight
too? ARETHA FRANKLIN: Uh-huh.
GWEN IFILL: You devoted a lot of
it to gospel, which I think
surprised some of the audiences.
Do you do that routinely? ARETHA
FRANKLIN: No, I just -- I was
listening to some of the C.D.s
earlier today, and I wasn't
happy with my opening song. It
just wasn't what I wanted it to
be And then up popped "I Came to
Lift Him Up," and I said, that's
it, that's it. That's what I
want to sing. GWEN IFILL:
Exactly. ARETHA FRANKLIN: It's
Sunday, and what could be
better? This is the lord's day.
GWEN IFILL: But I see you do
that when it's not Sunday.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Mm-hmm. GWEN
IFILL: And I wonder if part of
you feels... ARETHA FRANKLIN:
Yes. No, you don't have to have
any special day. GWEN IFILL: One
recent capstone to her career,
an invitation to perform for
Pope Francis when he visited
Philadelphia. She jumped at the
chance. ARETHA FRANKLIN: It was
wonderful, a very, very gracious
man, a very gracious man. GWEN
IFILL: And did you get that he
got what you were bringing to
this? ARETHA FRANKLIN: I think
that he did, yes. Uh-huh. He's
all about the word, bottom line.
GWEN IFILL: But when did you
cross the line from gospel to
pop? ARETHA FRANKLIN: I didn't
cross the line. Gospel goes with
me wherever I go. Gospel is a
constant with me. GWEN IFILL: So
when people hear you sing...
ARETHA FRANKLIN: So, I just
broadened my musical horizons.
GWEN IFILL: Yes. So when people
hear you sing "Pink Cadillac,"
there's gospel in that? ARETHA
FRANKLIN: No. So... (LAUGHTER)
ARETHA FRANKLIN: No, that's
secular. GWEN IFILL: That's
secular. ARETHA FRANKLIN: That
is secular, yes. GWEN IFILL: I
asked her if technology,
including auto-tuning and other
digital enhancement, has changed
the music industry's definition
of success. ARETHA FRANKLIN: My
generation, we came along, we
had to really know our craft.
And my dad helped me do that
long before I left home. People
really don't have to give you
anything, so appreciate what
people give you. And just don't
let that go to your head,
whatever it is they give you.
GWEN IFILL: But is it different
or harder or more difficult than
it was when you were coming up?
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Yes. Yes. GWEN
IFILL: Technology? ARETHA
FRANKLIN: Yes, it is. It's a lot
more difficult now, because you
have a lot more artists out here
now, particularly in hip-hop,
and rappers, and singers, and so
on. The competition is extremely
high, so you really have got to
have something going on. GWEN
IFILL: Franklin still has a lot
going on, including upcoming
projects with old friends,
artists she's known, but not
recorded with for decades.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: I love to
record with Stevie and Smokey.
GWEN IFILL: Have you never
recorded with... (CROSSTALK)
ARETHA FRANKLIN: No, we haven't.
George Benson and I are going to
do some things together. I have
got a lot of fabulous recording
ideas. GWEN IFILL: Will you ever
consider stopping? ARETHA
FRANKLIN: No, not ever, no. I'm
not ever going to retire. That's
-- that wouldn't be good, for
one, just to go somewhere and
sit down and do nothing. Please.
No, that's not moi. GWEN IFILL:
It's not moi. ARETHA FRANKLIN:
That is not moi. (LAUGHTER) GWEN
IFILL: Ms. Franklin, thank you
very much for talking to us.
ARETHA FRANKLIN: Thank you. JUDY
WOODRUFF: This holiday week, we
here at the "NewsHour" are
giving special thanks to our
fans. We just topped 500,000
followers on the "PBS NewsHour"
Facebook page. If you're not
already following the "NewsHour"
on Facebook, take a look. You
will find all of our best
content, chats with our anchors
and experts, news about what
we're working on and some
thoughtful comments from other
viewers like you. Thank you for
helping us reach this milestone.
And that's the "NewsHour" for
tonight. On Thursday,
Thanksgiving, Making Sense of
the economics that brought the
Pilgrims to Plymouth Rock. I'm
Judy Woodruff. Join us online
and again here tomorrow evening.
For all of us at the "PBS
NewsHour," wishing you a happy
Thanksgiving, thank you, and
good night.